Add explanations (#32)
canonical/ubuntu-packaging-guide: docs/explanation/package-model.rst

- a :file:`.dsc` (*Debian Source Control*) file,
- one or more compressed tar files, and 
- optionally additional files depending on the type and format of the *source package*.

The *Source Control* file contains metadata about the *source package*, for instance, 
a list of additional files, name and version, list of the binary packages it produces, 
dependencies, a digital signature and many more fields.

.. note::
  The article :doc:`/reference/debian-dir-overview` showcases the layout of 
  an unpacked *source package*.

Source Package Formats
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There exist multiple formats for how the :term:`Source` is packaged. The format of a 
*source package* is declared in the :file:`debian/source/format` file. This file should
always exist. If this file can not be found, the :ref:`format 1.0 <SourcePackageFormat_1.0>`
is assumed for backwards compatibility, but :manpage:`lintian(1)` will warn you about it.

.. tip::

    If you don't know what source format to use, you should probably pick either 
    :ref:`3.0 (quilt) <SourcePackageFormat_3.0quilt>` or
    :ref:`3.0 (native) <SourcePackageFormat_3.0native>`.

.. _NativeSourcePackages:

> (Non-)Native Source Packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Native source packages
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In most cases, a software project is packaged by external contributors

> (:term:`Maintainers <Maintainer>`) only tangentially related to the software project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(:term:`maintainers <Maintainer>`) only tangentially related to the software project. 
```

> (:term:`Maintainers <Maintainer>`) only tangentially related to the software project. 

Reviewer: In what sense do you mean "tangentially"?

Author: The maintainer/packager of a package are often 3rd parties from the perspective of a software project.

A good example is the Ubuntu tor browser. I don't know its current state, but the tor browser was once removed from the archive, because the tor project requested it. They had no control over the package version in the Ubuntu archive and were annoyed by users reporting bugs that were already fixed, because the users assumed that the package was reasonably up-to-date.

Author: I changed the wording with d95ce7b43232c1ae4f27b55c427d3369f63465e8

> Often, the *source package* has to do modifications to solve specific problems for its target
> :term:`Distribution`. The *source package* can, in these cases, be considered as its own

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often, the source package has to do modifications to solve specific problems for its target
:term:`distribution <Distribution>`. The source package can, in these cases, be considered as its own
```

software project, like a fork.

> Consequently, the :term:`Upstream` releases and *source package* releases do not always align.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consequently, the :term:`Upstream` releases and source package releases do not always align.
```

Native packages almost always originate from software projects designed with :term:`Debian`

> packaging in mind and have no independent existence outside its target :term:`Distribution`.

Reviewer: I'm not sure whether "its" in this case refers to native packages, software projects, or Debian software projects specifically

Author: I changed the wording with d95ce7b43232c1ae4f27b55c427d3369f63465e8

> packaging in mind and have no independent existence outside its target :term:`Distribution`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packaging in mind and have no independent existence outside its target :term:`distribution <Distribution>`.
```

> Native packages do not differentiate between :term:`Upstream` releases and *source package* releases.
> Therefore, the version identifier of a native package does not have a 
> :term:`Ubuntu` or :term:`Debian` specific component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Native packages do not differentiate between Upstream releases and source package releases.
Therefore, the version identifier of a native package does not have an 
Ubuntu- or Debian-specific component.
```

> :term:`Ubuntu` or :term:`Debian` specific component.

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure I could define, after reading this, what a native package actually *is*.

Author: I can improve it a bit, but I think you have to see the native package examples "3.0 (native)" below to fully grasp it.

Author: I expanded my explanation of native packages even further.

Resolved with d95ce7b43232c1ae4f27b55c427d3369f63465e8

.. _SourcePackageFormat_3.0quilt:

Format: ``3.0 (quilt)``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> A new-generation *source package* format that records modifications in a :manpage:`quilt(1)`
> :term:`Patch` series within the :file:`debian/patches` folder. The :term:`Patches <Patch>` are
> organized as a :term:`Stack`, and you can apply, un-apply, and update them easily by traversing 
> the :term:`Stack` (push/pop). These changes are automatically applied during the extraction of
> the *source package*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new-generation source package format that records modifications in a :manpage:`quilt(1)`
:term:`patch <Patch>` series within the :file:`debian/patches` folder. The patches are
organized as a :term:`stack <Stack>`, and you can apply, un-apply, and update them easily by traversing 
the stack (push/pop). These changes are automatically applied during the extraction of
the source package.
```

> the *source package*.

Reviewer: push/pop is a bit confusing without any context. I'd recommend either removing it, or adding the missing context.

Author: I added a definition in the glossary that explains what a Stack is.

Resolved with af788aa78c4d773eb1f64f5d1088f580ea9d71f4

> A *source package* in this format contains at least an original tarball (``.orig.tar.ext`` where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A source package in this format contains at least an original tarball (``.orig.tar.ext`` where
```

> ``ext`` can be ``gz``, ``bz2``, ``lzma`` and ``xz``) and a debian tarball (``.debian.tar.ext``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ext`` can be ``gz``, ``bz2``, ``lzma`` or ``xz``) and a Debian tarball (``.debian.tar.ext``).
```

It can also contain additional original tarballs (``.orig-component.tar.ext``), where ``component``
can only contain alphanumeric (``a-z``, ``A-Z``, ``0-9``) characters and hyphens (``-``).

> Optionally, each original tarball can be accompanied by a detached upstream signature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally, each original tarball can be accompanied by a detached Upstream signature
```

(``.orig.tar.ext.asc`` and ``.orig-component.tar.ext.asc``).

For example, take a look at the ``hello`` package:

.. code:: bash

>     pull-lp-source --download-only 'hello' '2.10-3'

Reviewer: This command doesn't work without first installing ubuntu-dev-tools

Reviewer: After I installed, I got the following output:

Found hello 2.10-3 in mantic
Downloading hello_2.10-3.dsc from archive.ubuntu.com (0.002 MiB)
[=====================================================>]100%
Good signature by Santiago Vila <sanvila@debian.org> (0x41CE7F0B9F1B8B32)
Downloading hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz from archive.ubuntu.com (0.692 MiB)
[=====================================================>]100%
Downloading hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz.asc from archive.ubuntu.com (0.001 MiB)
[=====================================================>]100%
Downloading hello_2.10-3.debian.tar.xz from archive.ubuntu.com (0.012 MiB)
[=====================================================>]100%

Author: Installing `ubuntu-dev-tools` will be part of the getting set up tutorial. I add a note.

Author: I added a note to the first pull-lp-source to install ubuntu-dev-tools

Resolved with d95ce7b43232c1ae4f27b55c427d3369f63465e8

> Now you should see the following files:

Reviewer: By "see" do you just mean the download summary, or is there some other command you'd need to run to just view the files as they are listed below?

Reviewer: Ah, I see them when I do `ls`

Author: Yes, my intention was to run `ls` afterwards, but theoretically both is fine. The download summary also shows the downloaded list of files.

Author: I now encourage to run ls.

Resolved with d95ce7b43232c1ae4f27b55c427d3369f63465e8

> - :file:`hello_2.10-3.dsc`: The *Debian Source Control* file of the *source package*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :file:`hello_2.10-3.dsc`: The Debian Source Control file of the source package.
```

> - :file:`hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz`: The tarball containing the original :term:`Source Code` of the :term:`Upstream` project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :file:`hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz`: The tarball containing the original source code of the Upstream project.
```

> - :file:`hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz.asc`: The detached :term:`Upstream` signature of :file:`hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :file:`hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz.asc`: The detached Upstream signature of :file:`hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz`.
```

> - :file:`hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz.asc`: The detached :term:`Upstream` signature of :file:`hello_2.10.orig.tar.gz`.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what a Detached upstream signature is

Author: I added an explanation to the glossary with 6d99a955667ed9dd14110f33d3a526a71a1bd871

> - :file:`hello_2.10-3.debian.tar.xz`: The tarball containing the content of the debian directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :file:`hello_2.10-3.debian.tar.xz`: The tarball containing the content of the Debian directory.
```

.. _SourcePackageFormat_3.0native:

Format: ``3.0 (native)``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> A new-generation *source package* format extends the native package
> format defined in the :ref:`format 1.0 <SourcePackageFormat_1.0>`.
> 
> A *source package* in this format is a tarball (``.tar.ext`` where ``ext``
> can be ``gz``, ``bz2``, ``lzma`` and ``xz``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new-generation source package format that extends the native package
format defined in the :ref:`format 1.0 <SourcePackageFormat_1.0>`. A source
package in this format is a tarball (``.tar.ext`` where ``ext``
can be ``gz``, ``bz2``, ``lzma`` or ``xz``).
```

> For example, take a look at the ``subiquity`` package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's take a look at the ``subiquity`` package:
```

.. code:: bash

    pull-lp-source --download-only 'ubiquity' '23.10.2'

Now you should see the following files:

> - ``ubiquity_23.10.2.dsc``:  The *Debian Source Control* file of the *source package*.
> - ``ubiquity_23.10.2.tar.xz``: The tarball containing the :term:`Source Code` of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``ubiquity_23.10.2.dsc``:  The Debian Source Control file of the source package.
- ``ubiquity_23.10.2.tar.xz``: The tarball containing the source code of the project.
```

.. _SourcePackageFormat_1.0:

Format: ``1.0``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The original *source package* format. Nowadays, this format is rarely used.
> 
> A native *source package* in this format consists of a single ``.tar.gz``
> file containing the :term:`Source`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The original source package format. Nowadays, this format is rarely used.
A native source package in this format consists of a single ``.tar.gz``
file containing the source.
```

> A non-native *source package* in this format consists of a ``.orig.tar.gz`` file
> (containing the :term:`Upstream` :term:`Source`) associated with a ``.diff.gz``
> file (the :term:`Patch` containing :term:`Debian` packaging modifications).
> Optionally, the original tarball can be accompanied by a detached :term:`Upstream`
> signature ``.orig.tar.gz.asc``. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A non-native source package in this format consists of an ``.orig.tar.gz`` file
(containing the Upstream source) associated with a ``.diff.gz``
file (the patch containing Debian packaging modifications).
Optionally, the original tarball can be accompanied by a detached Upstream
signature ``.orig.tar.gz.asc``. 
```

.. note::
  

>   This format does not specify a :term:`Patch` system, which makes it harder for
>   :term:`Maintainers <Maintainer>` to track modifications. There were multiple approaches
>   to how packages tracked :term:`Patches <Patch>`. Therefore, the *source packages* of this
>   format often contained a :file:`debian/README.source` file explaining how to use the 
>   :term:`Patch` system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This format does not specify a patch system, which makes it harder for
  maintainers to track modifications. There were multiple approaches
  to how packages tracked patches. Therefore, the source packages of this
  format often contained a :file:`debian/README.source` file explaining how to use the 
  patch system.
```

> ``3.0`` Formats Improvements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``3.0`` Format improvements
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some of the improvements that apply to most ``3.0`` formats are:

> - Support for additional compression formats: ``bzip2``, ``lzma`` and ``xz``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support for additional compression formats: ``bzip2``, ``lzma`` and ``xz``.
```

> - Support for multiple :term:`Upstream` tarballs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support for multiple Upstream tarballs.
```

> - Supports inclusion of binary files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support for inclusion of binary files.
```

> - :term:`Debian`-specific changes are no longer stored in a single ``.diff.gz``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Debian-specific changes are no longer stored in a single ``.diff.gz``.
```

> - The :term:`Upstream` tarball does not need to be repacked to strip the :term:`Debian` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Upstream tarball does not need to be repacked to strip the Debian directory.
```

Reviewer: I don't know what "strip" means in this context

> Other Formats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other formats
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following formats are rarely used, experimental and/or historical.

> You should only choose these if you know what you do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should only choose these if you know what you are doing.
```

> - ``3.0 (custom)``: Doesn't represent an actual *source package* format but can
>   be used to create *source packages* with arbitrary files.
> - ``3.0 (git)``: An experimental format to package from a :term:`git` repository.
> - ``3.0 (bzr)``: An experimental format to package from a :term:`Bazaar` repository.
> - ``2.0``: The first specification of a new-generation *source package* format.
>   It was never widely adopted and eventually replaced by
>   :ref:`3.0 (quilt) <SourcePackageFormat_3.0quilt>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``3.0 (custom)``: Doesn't represent an actual source package format but can
  be used to create source packages with arbitrary files.
- ``3.0 (git)``: An experimental format to package from a :term:`git` repository.
- ``3.0 (bzr)``: An experimental format to package from a :term:`Bazaar` repository.
- ``2.0``: The first specification of a new-generation source package format.
  It was never widely adopted and eventually replaced by
  :ref:`3.0 (quilt) <SourcePackageFormat_3.0quilt>`.
```

``.changes`` file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Although technically not part of a *source package* -- every time a *source package* is built,
> a :file:`.changes` file will be created alongside. The :file:`.changes` file contains metadata
> from the *Source Control* file and other information (e.g. the latest changelog entry) about the
> *source package*. :term:`Archive` tools and :term:`Archive Administrators <Archive Admin>` use this
> data to process changes to *source packages* and determine the appropriate action to upload the 
> *source package* to the :term:`Ubuntu Archive`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although technically not part of a source package -- every time a source package is built,
a :file:`.changes` file will be created alongside it. The :file:`.changes` file contains metadata
from the Source Control file and other information (e.g. the latest changelog entry) about the
source package. :term:`Archive` tools and :term:`Archive Administrators <Archive Admin>` use this
data to process changes to source packages and determine the appropriate action to upload the 
source package to the :term:`Ubuntu Archive`.
```

.. _BinaryPackages:

> Binary Packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Binary packages
```

Reviewer: I would actually recommend moving this to above the source packages section, since this one is so short and binary packages are referenced elsewhere - I think it's important not to bury this bit at the end of the page

---------------

> A *binary package* is a standardized format that the :term:`Package Manager` (:manpage:`dpkg(1)` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **binary package** is a standardized format that the :term:`Package Manager` (:manpage:`dpkg(1)` or
```

> :manpage:`apt(8)`) can understand to install and uninstall software on a target machine to simplify
> distributing software to a target machine and managing software on a target machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:manpage:`apt(8)`) can understand to install and uninstall software on a target machine. This simplifies
distributing software to a target machine and managing the software on that machine.
```

> A :term:`Debian` *binary package* is a file with the :file:`.deb` file extension that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Debian binary package uses the :file:`.deb` file extension and
```
